Autism is a developmental disorder characterized by deficits in social communication, including social affect, social reciprocity, appropriate verbal and nonverbal communication, empathy, and more.  (Cite DSM-V).  Language deficits and differences have been noted since the early days of the definition of autism (cite Kanner et. al), although language regression and delay have been removed as a diagnostic criteria (cite DSM-V and literature).  We know that autism affects receptive language skills including comprehension and response to one's own name as well as expressive skills in the production of language in the motor, lexical, syntactic, and pragmatic domains.  Motor deficits include differences in prosody and articulation, giving rise to the characterization of autistic speech as excessively melodic or monotonic, irregularly paced, (Cite Parish-Morris) or accompanied by difficulty with pronounciation, particularly in certain phonemes (cite Tager-Flusberg).  Differences in the lexical domain include the coining of neologisms and the use of particularly complex or unusual words when simpler terms are available.  Syntactic differences include early signs of pronomial deficits, including pronomial reversal, omissions of articles and inappropriate use of zero anaphoras, and difficulties in certain verb tenses.  Pragmatic differences include the lack of interest or ability in tailoring language to the needs or perspective of the listener (cite Colle), abruptness, unusal or inappropriate interjections and questions, and overly self-centered conversation. Although both language delay and language deviance are frequent occurrences, there is a wide continuum in level of deficit, ranging from some autistic people (put footnote here citing Sinclair re: language) being completely non-verbal to those whose lack overt language deficit altogether.  Language deficit does display correlation to other aspects of development, including IQ and theory of mind (ToM).

Correlation alone does not disclose the mechanism of linked deficits.  It is unclear to what degree language drives other symptoms, such as lack of perspective or theory of mind, or is itself shaped by these other symptom categories.  Certainly language is entangled in all social interaction and cannot be viewed in isolation as a wholly separate skill.  Effective pragmatic communication requires a level of empathy with the interlocutor -- understanding the mental state both in terms of knowledge, both current and future-state (cite Colle) and in terms of emotion, such as the detection of boredom, cues for topic change, etc.

Studying narrative blog posts by autistic people provides multiple advantages, when compared to the study of one-on-one conversational narratives.  Autistic people report that internet-driven communication allows them to express themselves more freely and with less stress than live interpersonal communication.  Non-verbal communication deficits are removed as a hindrance, as asynchronous, text-based internet communication removes visual cues and expected behavior including eye contact, gesture, and gross body language.  Physical stimming can occur without affecting communication, and the reader or interlocutor (in the case of text-based internet conversation) is unaware of it.  Additionally, social motivation deficits are largely removed as a confounder, as bloggers communicate on topics of their choosing at the time and frequency they desire. This more ecological approach removes experimental effects of artifical paradigms such as telling a story from a picture book (cite multiple studies using this method) or other methods that may be affected by the subject's lack of interest in the task.  Additionally, conversational feedback, in which an interlocutor responds to communication deficits, either through compensation (such as increased bids for attention) (ask Julia about htis) or disengagement (in which an interlocutor becomes less involved or responds negatively to odd or non-standard social communication) is eliminated.  Turn-taking differences, interruption, overlong pauses, and other interactivity differences are also removed. The blog post is a one-way communication, developed by highly functional, motivated, linguistically talented communicators on the topic of their choice.  This allows us to tease out true linguistic differences from other social deficits in our study of language production in autism.

Certainly, blog posts do not constitute data collected with scientific rigor.  This is an observational, not experimental study, and there is no diagnostic certainty.  The autistic blogger may in fact not have autism, their writing may be influenced by or copied from another, and biographical, phenotypic, and demographic details such as age, sex, comorbid language disorders, IQ, and SES are lacking altogether or highly untrustworthy.

